Page 1 of 23
B.Tech. SYLLABUS
(I YEAR)
2019-20 Onwards
(Suggestions incorporated)
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
TIRUCHIRAPPALLI - 620015
TAMILNADU, INDIA
Page 2 of 23
B.Tech. Curriculum Structure e e Students admitted in 2019 e e 20 (CL, CE, ME, MT, PR)
Semester I (July Session)
Sl. No. COURSE Credits Category
1 English for Communication (Theory) 2 GIR
2 English for Communication (Lab) 2 GIR
3 Matrices and Calculus 3 GIR
4 Chemistry 3 GIR
5 Chemistry Lab 2 GIR
6 Branch Specific Course 2 GIR
7 Basics of Electrical and Electronics Engineering 
(For CL, CE, ME, MT, PR) 
2 GIR
8 Engineering Graphics 3 GIR
Total 19
Semester II (January Session) 
Sl. No. COURSE Credits Category
1 Complex Analysis and Differential Equations 3 GIR
2 Physics 3 GIR
3 Physics Lab 2 GIR
4 Introduction to Computer Programming 
(Theory & lab )
3 GIR
5 Basics of Civil Engineering (for CL, ME, MT, PR) 2 GIR
6 Energy and Environmental Engineering 2 GIR
7 Engineering Practice 2 GIR
8 Programme Core e I 4 PC
Total 21
Page 3 of 23
B.Tech. Curriculum Structure e Students admitted in 2019 e 20 (CS, EE, EC and IC)
Semester I (July Session)
Sl. No. COURSE Credits Category
1 Energy and Environmental Engineering 2 GIR
2 Linear Algebra and Calculus 3 GIR
3 Physics 3 GIR
4 Physics Lab 2 GIR
5 Introduction to Computer Programming 
(Theory & lab ) 
3 GIR
6 Basics of Mechanical Engineering (For CE, EE, EC, 
IC & CS) 
2 GIR
7 Engineering Practice 2 GIR
8 Basics of Civil Engineering (For EE, EC, IC & CS) 2 GIR
Total 19
Semester II (January Session) 
Sl. No. COURSE Credits Category
1 English for Communication (Theory) 2 GIR
2 English for Communication (Lab) 2 GIR
3 Complex Analysis and Differential Equations 3 GIR
4 Chemistry 3 GIR
5 Chemistry Lab 2 GIR
6 Branch Specific Course 2 GIR
7 Engineering Graphics 3 GIR
8 Programme Core e I 4 PC
Total 21
Page 4 of 23
CHIR11 CHEMISTRY
Course Code: CHIR11 No. of Credits: 03
Course Name: Chemistry Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES
To introduce the student's basic principles of Electrochemistry and Corrosion. They will be 
familiar with phase rule & its applications. Students will know about the essential requirements 
of water and its importance in day-to-day life. To provide students with a brief outline of the 
types and applications of polymers. Finally, students will be equipped with the usage of 
spectroscopy in industrial applications.
COURSE CONTENT
Electrochemistry and Corrosion 
Cell EMF- its measurement and applications - concentration cell - electrode electrolyte 
concentration cell - concentration cell with and without transference - Dry corrosion and wet 
corrosion, mechanisms, types of corrosion, Differential metal corrosion, differential aeration 
corrosion, intergranular, Passivity, Pitting, Polarization - Chemical conversion coatings and 
organic coatings- Paints, enamels.
Phase rule 
Definition of terms e phase- components- degree of freedom- derivation of Gibbs phase rule e
one component system e e H2O, CO2, Sulfur e Two-component system e Eutectic systems ms m
reduced phase rule - Pb-Ag system e Compound Formation with congruent melting e e Zn- Mg 
Alloy system- Copper-nickel alloy system - systems with incongruent melting e Na2SO4- H2O 
system and simple three-component systems.
Water
Sources, Hard & soft water, Estimation of hardness by EDTA method, Scale & Sludge- Caustic 
embrittlement - softening of water, zeolite process & demineralization by ion exchangers, boiler 
feed water, internal treatment methods-specifications for drinking water, BIS & WHO standards, 
treatment of water for domestic use, desalination - Reverse osmosis & Electrodialysis. 
Spectroscopy
Interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter, Electronic spectroscopy - Theory of 
electronic transitions, instrumentation, Beers Lambert law, Woodward FIESER rule, 
applications. IR spectroscopy - Fundamentals, Instrumentation, and applications, Raman 
spectroscopy e Fundamentals and applications.
Polymers and Composites 
Concept of macromolecules- Tacticity- Classification of Polymers- Types of PolymerizationMechanism- - Ziegler Natta Polymerization - Effect of Polymer structure on properties -
Important addition and condensation polymers esynthesis and properties e e Molecular mass 
determination of polymers- Static and dynamic methods, Light scattering- Rubbers e
Vulcanization e e Synthetic rubbers e e Conducting polymers- Composite materials 
COURSE OUTCOME

 Students will learn about the Electrochemistry and phase rule. 

 They will be familiarized with the importance of polymer and its application in industries. 

 Additionally, a brief introduction in the area of water, spectroscopy will be very useful 
for the students in future endeavour
Page 5 of 23
References & Text Books
1. P.C. Jain, M. Jain, Engineering Chemistry, Dhanpat Rai Publishing Company, New 
Delhi, 2005. 
2. P. Atkins, J.D. Paula, Physical Chemistry, Oxford University Press, 2002.
3. B.R. Puri, L.R. Sharma, M.S. Pathania, Principles of Physical Chemistry, Vishal 
Publishing Company, 2008
4. F.W. Billmayer, Textbook of Polymer Science, 3rd Edison, Wiley. N.Y. 1991.
5. S.S. Darer, S.S. Umare, A Text Book of Engineering Chemistry, S. Chand Publishing, 
2011.
Page 6 of 23
CHIR12 CHEMISTRY LAB
Course Code: CHIR12 No. of Credits: 02
Course Name: Chemistry Lab Prerequisite: Nil
LIST OF EXPERIMENTS
1. Estimation of carbonate, non-carbonate and total hardness in the given water sample. 
2. Estimation of dissolved oxygen in the given water sample. 
3. Determination of the percentage of Fe in the given steel sample. 
4. Estimation of Fe3+ by spectrophotometer. 
5. Corrosion rate by polarization technique 
6. Conductometric titration 
7. Potentiometric titration 
8. pH-metric titration 
9. Percentage purity of bleaching powder 
10. Determination of molecular weight of the polymer by Viscometry 
11. Study of three component system.
12. Demonstration experiments using Advanced Spectroscopic Techniques, (UV-Vis, FTIR, 
Raman)
COURSE OUTCOME
 The chemistry laboratory course will consist of experiments illustrating the principles of 
chemistry relevant to the study of science and engineering. 
 The students will learn how to estimate various components from the corresponding bulk 
mixture. 
Reference Books 
1. Laboratory Manual, Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology, 
Tiruchirappalli. 
2. S.K. Bhasin, S. Rani, Laboratory Manual on Engineering Chemistry, Dhanpat Rai 
Publishing Company, New Delhi, 2011.
Page 7 of 23
ENIR 11 ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Course Code: ENIR11 No. of Credits: 02
Course Name: Energy and Environmental Engineering Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES
 To teach the principal renewable energy systems. 

 To explore the environmental impact of various energy sources and also the effects of 
different types of pollutants. 
COURSE CONTENT 
Present Energy resources in India and its sustainability - Different type of conventional Power 
Plant--Energy Demand Scenario in India-Advantage and Disadvantage of conventional Power 
Plants e e Conventional vs Non-conventional power generation.
Basics of Solar Energy- Solar Thermal Energy- Solar Photovoltaic- Advantages and
Disadvantages-Environmental impacts and safety.
Power and energy from wind turbines- Indiaiais wind energy potential- Types of wind turbinesOffshore Wind energy- Environmental benefits and impacts. 
Biomass Resources-Biomass conversion Technologies- Feedstock preprocessing and treatment 
methods- Bioenergy program in India-Environmental benefits and impacts.
Geothermal Energy resources ces cOcean Thermal Energy Conversion e e Tidal. 
Air pollution- Sources, effects, control, air quality standards, air pollution act, air pollution 
measurement. Water Pollution-Sources and impacts, Soil Pollution-Sources and impacts, 
disposal of solid waste. 
Greenhouse gases e e effect, acid rain. Noise pollution. Pollution aspects of various power plants. 
Fossil fuels and impacts, Industrial and transport emissions- impacts. 
COURSE OUTCOME 
Students will be introduced to the Principal renewable energy systems and explore the 
environmental impact of various energy sources and also the effects of different types of 
pollutants. 
References
1. Boyle G, Renewable energy: Power for a sustainable future. Oxford University press, 
2004. 
2. B H Khan, Nonconventional Energy Resources, The McGraw w wHill Second edition. 
3. G. D. Rai, Nonconventional energy sources, Khanna Publishers, New Delhi, 2006. 
4. Gilbert M. Masters, Introduction to Environmental Engineering and Science, 2nd Edition, 
Prentice Hall, 2003.
5. G Sargsyam, M Bhatia, S G Banerjee, K Raghunathan and R Soni, Unleashing the 
Potential of Renewable Energy in India, World bank report, Washington D.C, 2011.
6. Godfrey Boyle, Bob Everett and Janet Ramage, Energy Systems and Sustainability:
Power for a sustainable future. Oxford University press, 2010.
Page 8 of 23
HSIR11 ENGLISH FOR COMMUNICATION
Course Code: HSIR11 No. of Credits: 04
Course Name: English for Communication Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES
The primary objective is to develop in the under-graduate students of engineering a level of 
competence in English required for independent and effective communication for academic and 
social needs.
COURSE CONTENT
Theory: Language and communication-reading strategies: skimming, scanning, inferring, 
predicting and responding to content e e Guessing from context e Note making e Vocabulary 
extension - speed reading practice e use of extensive reading texts.
Analytical and critical reading practice- critical, creative and lateral thinking- language and 
thinking e thinking process and language development. 
Effective writing practice e Vocabulary expansion - Effective sentences: role of acceptability, 
appropriateness, brevity & clarity in writing e e Cohesion & coherence in writing ting tWriting of 
definitions, descriptions - Paragraph writing.
Reciprocal relationship between reading and writing ethinking and writing - Argument Writing 
practice e e Perspectives in writing riting rprofessional writing - Narrative writing.
Lab: Listening process & practice e Exposure to recorded & structured talks, class room lectures 
e e Problems in comprehension & retention e Note-taking practice e e Listening tests- Importance 
of listening in the corporate world.
Barriers to listening: Physical & psychological e e Steps to overcome them e Purposive listening 
practice e Active listening and anticipating the speaker e e Use of technology to improve the skill.
Fluency & accuracy in speech ch cImproving self-expression e Tonal variations e Listener oriented 
speaking -Group discussion practice e Interpersonal Conversation -Developing persuasive 
speaking skills.
Barriers to speaking e Building self-confidence & fluency e e Conversation practice- Improving 
responding capacity - Extempore speech practice e Speech assessment. 
COURSE OUTCOME
The students will be able to express themselves in a meaningful manner to different levels of 
people in their academic and social domains.
Reference Books
1. M. Ashraf Rizvi, Effective Technical Communication, Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, 
2005.
2. Strunk, William, and E B. White, The Elements of Style. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 
Pearson Edition, 1999. 
3. Garner, Bryan A, HBR Guide to Better Business Writing, Hardvard Business Review 
Press, Boston, Massachusetts, 2013. 
Page 9 of 23
MAIR11 MATRICES AND CALCULUS
(Common to Chemical, Civil, Mechanical, Metallurgy and Production Engineering)
Course Code: MAIR 11 No. of Credits: 03
Course Name: Matrices and Calculus Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES
 Introduce eigen value and eigen vectors and its properties.
 Determine canonical form of given quadratic form.

 Discuss the convergence of infinite series.

 Analyze and discuss the extrema of the functions of several variables.
 Evaluate the multiple integrals and apply in solving problems.
 Introduce vector differential operator for vector function and important theorems on 
vector functions to solve engineering problems
COURSE CONTENT
Eigenvalues and eigenvectors; Diagonalization of matrices; Cayley-Hamilton Theorem. 
Quadratic form.
Sequence and series: Convergence of sequence. Infinite Series-Tests for Convergence-Integral 
test, comparison test, Ratio test, Root test, Raabeiais test, Logarithmic test, and Leibnitziais test;
Powerseries.
Functions of two variables: Limit, continuity and partial derivatives; Totalderivative, Jacobian, 
Taylor series, Maxima,minima and saddle points; Method of Lagrange multipliers; Double and
triple integrals, change of variables, multiple integral in cylindrical and spherical coordinates.
Gradient, divergence and curl; Line and surface integrals; Green's theorem, Stokes theorem and 
Gauss divergence theorem (without proofs).
COURSE OUTCOME
1. Compute eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the given matrix.
2. Transform given quadratic form into canonical form.
3. Discuss the convergence of infinite series by applying various test. 
4. Compute partial derivatives of function of several variables
5. Write tayloriais series for functions with two variables. 
6. Evaluate multiple integral and its applications in finding area, volume. 
7. Compute the dot product of vectors, lengths of vectors, and angles between vectors.
8. Perform gradient, div, curl operator on vector functions and give physical interpretations. 
9. Use greeniais, gauss divergence and stokeiais theorems to solve engineering problems. 
References
1. Dennis Zill, Warren S. Wright, Michael R. Cullen, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 
Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2011
2. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, John Wiley & Sons, 2019.
3. Jerrold E. Marsden, Anthony Tromba, Vector Calculus, W. H. Freeman, 2003
4. Strauss M.J, G.L. Bradley and K.J. Smith, Multivariable calculus, Prentice Hall, 2002.
5. Ward Cheney, David Kincaid, Linear Algebra: Theory and Applications, Jones & 
Bartlett Publishers, 2012.
Page 10 of 23
MAIR12 LINEAR ALGEBRA AND CALCULUS
(Common to CSE, EEE, ECE and ICE)
Course Code: MAIR12 No. of Credits: 03
Course Name: Linear Algebra and Calculus Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES
1. Introduce vector space and inner product space and it properties. 
2. Introduce eigen value and eigen vectors and its properties.
3. Determine canonical form of given quadratic form.
4. Discuss the convergence of infinite series.
5. Analyze and discuss the extrema of the functions of several variables. 
6. Evaluate the multiple integrals and apply in solving problems.
COURSE CONTENT
Vector space e Subspaces c Linear dependence and independence e Spanning of a subspacems m
Basis and Dimension. Inner product e Inner product spaces e Orthogonal and orthonormal basis 
e e GramSchmidt orthogonalization process. Linear transformation. Eigenvalues and
eigenvectors;Diagonalization ofmatrices;Cayley-HamiltonTheorem. Quadratic form
Sequence and series: Convergence of sequence. Infinite Series-Tests for Convergence-Integral 
test, comparison test, Ratio test, Root test, Raabeiais test, Logarithmic test and Leibnitziais test;
Powerseries;
Functions of two variables: Limit, continuity and partial derivatives; Totalderivative, Jacobian, 
Taylor series, Maxima,minima and saddle points; Method of Lagrange multipliers; Double and
triple integrals, change of variables, multiple integral in cylindrical and spherical coordinates.
COURSE OUTCOME
1. Compute eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the given matrix.
2. Identity vector space and its basis.
3. Construct orthonormal basis for a given vector space.
4. Transform given quadratic form into canonical form.
5. Discuss the convergence of infinite series by applying various test. 
6. Compute partial derivatives of function of several variables
7. Write tayloriais series for functions with two variables. 
8. Evaluate multiple integral and its applications in finding area, volume.
References
1. Dennis Zill, Warren S. Wright, Michael R. Cullen, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 
Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2011
2. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, John Wiley & Sons, 2019.
3. Strauss M.J, G.L. Bradley and K.J. Smith, Multivariable Calculus, Prentice Hall, 2002.
4. Ward Cheney, David Kincaid, Linear Algebra: Theory and Applications, Jones & 
Bartlett Publishers, 2012.
Page 11 of 23
MAIR21 COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
(Common to CL, CV, ME, MME and PR)
Course Code: MAIR21 No. of Credits: 03
Course Name: Complex Analysis and Differential Equations Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES
The course presents 
1. an introduction to analytic functions and power series. 
2. various Cauchyiais theorems and its applications in evaluation of integral.
3. various approach to find general solution of the ordinary differential equations
4. Laplace transform techniques to find solution of differential equations Partial differential 
equations and methods to find solution.
COURSE CONTENT
Analytic functions; Cauchy-Riemann equations; Line integral, Cauchy's integral theorem and
integral formula (without proof); Taylor's series and Laurent series; Residue theorem (without
proof) and its applications.
Higher order linear differential equations with constant coefficients; Second order linear
differential equations with variable coefficients; Method of variation of parameters; CauchyEuler equation; Powerseriessolutions; Legendre polynomials,Bessel functions of the first kind and 
their properties.
Laplace Transform of Standard functions, derivatives and integrals e e Inverse Laplace transform 
e e Convolution theorem e Periodic functions e e Application to ordinary differential equation.
Formation of partial differential equations by eliminating arbitrary constants and functions ms m
solution of first order partial differential equations e e four standard types e Lagrangeis equation. 
Method of separation of variables.
COURSE OUTCOME
Completion of the course, student will be able to
1. understand analytic functions discuss its properties 
2. obtain series representation of analytic functions 
3. evaluate various integrals by using Cauchyiais residue theorem
4. classify singularities and derive Laurent series expansion 
5. find the solutions of first and some higher order ordinary differential equations
6. apply properties of special functions in discussion the solution of ODE.
7. Find Laplace transform of a given function and its inverse Laplace transform.
8. Find solution of first order partial differential equations.
References
1. James Ward Brown, Ruel Vance Churchill, Complex Variables and Applications, 
McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 2004
2. Dennis Zill, Warren S. Wright, Michael R. Cullen, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 
Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2011
3. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, John Wiley & Sons, 2019.
4. William E. Boyce, Richard C. DiPrima, Douglas B. Meade, Elementary Differential 
Equations and Boundary Value Problems, Wiley, 2017. 
5. Ian N. Sneddon, Elements of Partial Differential Equations, Courier Corporation, 2013
Page 12 of 23
MAIR22 COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS 
(Common to CSE, EEE, ECE and ICE)
Course Code: MAIR22 No. of Credits: 03
Course Name: Complex analysis and Differential Equations Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES
The course presents 
1. an introduction to analytic functions and power series. 
2. various Cauchyhyh theorems and its applications in evaluation of integral.
3. various approach to find general solution of the ordinary differential equations
4. Laplace transform techniques to find solution of differential equations
5. Partial differential equations and methods to find solution of it.
COURSE CONTENT
Analytic functions; Cauchy-Riemann equations; Line integral, Cauchy's integral theorem and
integral formula (without proof); Taylor's series and Laurent series; Residue theorem (without
proof) and its applications.
Higher order linear differential equations with constant coefficients; Second order linear
differential equations with variable coefficients; Method of variation of parameters; CauchyEuler equation.
Laplace Transform of Standard functions, derivatives and integrals e Inverse Laplace transform 
e Convolution theorem e e Periodic functions e e solution of ordinary differential equation and 
simultaneous equations with constant coefficients and integral equations by Laplace Transform.
Formation of partial differential equations by eliminating arbitrary constants and functions e e 
solution of first order equations e e four standard types e e Lagrangeiais equation. Method of 
separation of variables.
COURSE OUTCOME
Completion of the course, student will be able to
1. understand analytic functions discuss its properties 
2. obtain series representation of analytic functions 
3. evaluate various integrals by using Cauchyiais residue theorem
4. classify singularities and derive Laurent series expansion 
5. find the solutions of first and some higher order ordinary differential equations
6. apply properties of special functions in discussion the solution of ODE.
7. Find Laplace transform of a given function and its inverse Laplace transform.
8. Find solution of first order partial differential equations.
References
1. James Ward Brown, Ruel Vance Churchill, Complex Variables and Applications, 
McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 2004
2. Dennis Zill, Warren S. Wright, Michael R. Cullen, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 
Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2011
3. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, John Wiley & Sons, 2019.
4. William E. Boyce, Richard C. DiPrima, Douglas B. Meade, Elementary Differential 
Equations and Boundary Value Problems, Wiley, 2017. 
5. Ian N. Sneddon, Elements of Partial Differential Equations, Courier Corporation, 2013
Page 13 of 23
PHIR11 PHYSICS
Course Code: PHIR11 No. of Credits: 03
Course Name: Physics Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES
 To introduce the notions of light matter interaction, fabrication of lasers, light 
propagation in waveguides, applications of lasers and optical fibers to engineering 
students.
 To comprehend and explain the concepts of matter waves, wave functions and its 
interpretation to understand the matter at atomic scale.
 To teach the fundamentals of nuclear forces, models and classification of matter.
 To impart knowledge about the basics of conductors, superconductors, nanomaterials 
and their applications in science, engineering and technology.
COURSE CONTENT
Lasers: Introduction to Laser-characteristics of Lasers-spontaneous and stimulated emissions e
Einsteiniais coefficients e e population inversion and lasing action e e laser systems: He-Ne Laser, 
semiconductor laser-applications.
Fiber Optics: Snelliais law-optical fiber e principle and construction e acceptance cone -
numerical aperture etypes of fibers - fiber optic communication principle e fiber optic sensors.
Quantum Mechanics: Inadequacy of classical mechanics-black body radiation, photoelectric 
effect- wave and particle duality of radiation e e de Broglie concept of matter waves e electron 
diffraction e e Heisenbergiais uncertainty principle e Schrodingeriais wave equation e e eigen values 
and eigen functions e superposition principle e interpretation of wave function e e particle 
confined in one dimensional infinite square well potential.
Nuclear and Particle Physics: Nuclear properties and forces - Nuclear models - Shell model -
Nuclear reaction - Radioactivity - types and half-life. Fundamental forces - Particle physics -
classification of matter - quark model.
Physics of Advanced Materials: Conductors: classical free electron theory (Lorentz eDrude 
theory) e e electrical conductivity. Superconductors: definition e Meissner effect e e type I & II 
superconductors e BCS theory (qualitative). Nanomaterials: introduction and properties ms m
synthesis e top-down and bottom-up approach e e applications.
COURSE OUTCOME
1. On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
2. know principle, construction and working of lasers and their applications in various 
science and engineering.
3. explain light propagation in optical fibers, types and their applications. 
4. experience and appreciate the behaviour of matter at atomic scale, and to impart 
knowledge in solving problems in modern science and engineering. 
5. understand the role of nuclear and particle physics in applications like radioactivity and 
nuclear reactions. 
6. recognize, choose and apply knowledge to develop materials for specific applications for 
common needs.
Page 14 of 23
References
1. William T. Silfvast, Laser Fundamentals, 2
nd Edition, Cambridge University press, 
New York, 2004. 
2. D. Halliday, R. Resnick and J. Walker, Fundamentals of Physics, 6th Edition, John 
Wiley and Sons, New York, 2001. 
3. Arthur Beiser, Concepts of Modern Physics, Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, 2010. 
4. R. Shankar, Fundamentals of Physics, Yale University Press, New Haven and London, 
2014. 
5. R. Shankar, Fundamentals of Physics II, Yale University Press, New Haven and London, 
2016.
6. C.P. Poole and F.J. Owens, Introduction to Nanotechnology, Wiley, New Delhi, 2007.
7. Charles Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 8th Edition, John Wiley & Sons, NJ, 
USA, 2005. 
Page 15 of 23
PHIR12 PHYSICS LAB 
Course Code: PHIR12 No. of Credits: 02
Course Name: Physics Lab Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES

 To introduce the spirit of experiments to verify physics concepts such as reflection, 
refraction, diffraction and interference on light matter interaction.
 To perform experiments to estimate the materials properties and to check their suitability 
in science and engineering.
 To familiarize physics concepts and to design instruments and experimental set up for 
better and accurate measurements. 
 To teach and apply knowledge to measure and verify the values of certain constants in 
physics.
LIST OF EXPERIMENTS
1. Determination of rigidity modulus of a metallic wire
2. Conversion of galvanometer into ammeter and voltmeter
3. Wavelength of laser using diffraction grating
4. Dispersive power of a prism e Spectrometer
5. Radius of curvature of lens-Newtoniais Rings
6. Numerical aperture of an optical fiber 
7. Field along the axis of a Circular coil
8. Wavelength of white light e e Spectrometer
9. Calibration of Voltmeter e Potentiometer 
10. Thickness of a thin wire e Air Wedge
11. Specific rotation of a liquid e e Half Shade Polarimeter
12. Photoelectric effect e Planckiais constant
COURSE OUTCOME
On completion of this course, the students will be able to
1. Know how to calibrate a galvanometer and convert it into a current and voltmeters.
2. To make experimental setup to verify certain physics concepts of wave and particle 
nature of light.
3. Understand the light propagation in fibers, light matter interaction and use of lasers in 
science and engineering. 
4. Acquire knowledge, estimate and suggest materials for engineering applications.
References
1. Physics Laboratory Manual, Department of Physics, National Institute of Technology 
Tiruchirappalli, 2018. 
2. R.K. Shukla, Anchal Srivastava, Practical Physics, New age international, 2011. 
3. C.L Arora, B.Sc. Practical Physics, S. Chand & Co., 2012. 
Page 16 of 23
CSIR11 INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER PROGRAMMING
(Common to CL, CV, ME, MME, PR)
Course Code: CSIR11 No. of Credits: 03
Course Name: Introduction to Computer Programming Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES
 To learn the fundamentals of computers. 

 To learn the problem solving techniques using algorithms and procedures
 To read, write and execute simple Python Programs

 To learn and use Python data structures e lists, tuples and dictionaries
COURSE CONTENT
Introduction to computers e Computer Organization e Characteristics e Hardware and Software 
e Modes of operation e Types of programming languages e Developing a program. Algorithms 
e Characteristics e e Flowcharts.
Data types; variables, assignments; immutable variables; numerical types; arithmetic operators 
and expressions; comments; understanding error messages; Conditions, Boolean logic, logical 
operators; ranges; Control statements: if-else, loops (for, while); short-circuit (lazy) evaluation 
Strings and text files; manipulating files and directories, OS and SYS modules; text files: 
reading/writing text and numbers from/to a file; creating and reading a formatted file (csv or tabseparated). String manipulations: subscript operator, indexing, slicing a string; strings and 
number system: converting strings to numbers and vice versa. Binary, octal, hexadecimal 
numbers 
Lists, tuples, and dictionaries; basic list operators, replacing, inserting, removing an element; 
searching and sorting lists; dictionary literals, adding and removing keys, accessing and replacing 
values; traversing dictionaries. 
Design with functions: hiding redundancy, complexity; arguments and return values; formal vs 
actual arguments, named arguments- Program structure and design- Recursive functions e
Introduction to classes and OOP.
List of Programs
1. Programs using sequential constructs
2. Programs using selection constructs
3. Programs using Iterative constructs 
4. Programs using nested for loops
5. Programs using lists
6. Programs using tuples and dictionaries
7. Simple Python functions
8. File input and output
9. Sorting and searching programs
10. Recursion
Page 17 of 23
COURSE OUTCOME

 Write algorithms for problems
 Use syntax and semantics of Python programming language for problem solving
 Code a given logic in Python language
 Appreciate and apply appropriate Data structures available in Python language for 
solving problems
References
1. Kenneth A. Lambert, Fundamentals of Python: First Programs, CENGAGE Learning, 
2012.
2. Guido van Rossum and Fred L. Drake Jr, An Introduction to Python e Revised and 
updated for Python 3.2, Network Theory Ltd., 2011.
3. Reema Thareja, Python Programming using Problem Solving Approach, Oxford 
University Press, 2017
4. Allen B. Downey, Think Python: How to Think Like a Computer Scientist, 2nd edition, 
Updated for Python 3, Shroff/O, thReilly Publishers, 2016.
(http://greenteapress.com/wp/thinkpython/)
5. John V Guttag, Introduction to Computation and Programming Using Python, Revised 
and expanded Edition, MIT Press, 2013.
Page 18 of 23
CSIR12 INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER PROGRAMMING
(Common to CS, EEE, ECE, ICE)
Course Code: CSIR12 No. of Credits: 03
Course Name: Introduction to Computer Programming Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES

 To learn the fundamentals of computers.
 To learn the problem solving techniques writing algorithms & procedures.
 To learn the syntax and semantics for C programming language.
 To develop the C code for simple logic.
 To understand the construct of structure program including conditionals and iterations
COURSE CONTENT
Introduction to computers - Types of programming languages- Developing a program -
Algorithms- Characteristics- Flow Charts- Principles of structured programming- Sequential 
selecting structures- Repetitive Structures-Bounded, Unbounded and Infinite iterations. 
Introduction to C- C character set- Identifiers and Keywords- Data types- Constants- VariablesDeclarations- Expressions- Statements- Symbolic Constants- Operators- Library FunctionsData input and output: Single character input and output- Entering input data- Writing output 
data- gets and puts functions - Control Statements- Branching: if-else-looping: while- do-whilefor; Nested control Structures- switch statements- Break statements- Continue StatementsComma operator- goto statements.
Modular Programming- Functions and Procedures - Examples- Parameters passing methods -
Arrays- Defining an array- Processing an array- Multi dimensional arrays- Pointers- Variables 
definitions and initializations- Pointer operators- Pointer expressions and arithmetic- Pointers
and one dimensional arrays - String operations.
Functions- Defining function- Accessing a function- Function prototypes- Passing arguments to 
a functions- Passing arrays to a function- Passing Pointers to function- Recursion e e Dynamic 
memory allocation - malloc, calloc, realloc e Structures e e Declaration e Structures and Functions 
e Arrays of Structures e Pointers to structures e Typedef - Unions e e Bit-fields.
Files e Input / Output using files e fread, fwrite, fprintf, fscanf e e Formatted input e File access - 
argc, argv.
COURSE OUTCOME
 Ability to write algorithms for problems
 Knowledge of the syntax and semantics of C programming language
 Ability to code a given logic in C language
 Knowledge in using C language for solving problems
References
1. Byron Gottfried, Programming with C, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill Education, 2010.
2. R.G. Dromey, How to solve it by Computers? Prentice Hall, 2011.
3. Brian W Kernighan and Dennis Ritchie, The C Programming language, 2nd Edition, 
Prentice Hall, 1988. 
4. J.R.Hanly and E.B. Koffmann, Problem Solving and Program design in C, 6th Edition, 
Pearson Education, 2009.
5. Paul Deital and Harvey Deital, C How to Program? 7
th Edition, Prentice Hall, 2012.
6. YashvantKanetkar, Let Us C, 12th Edition, BPB Publications, 2012.
Page 19 of 23
MEIR11 BASICS OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
(Common to all branches except ME)
Course Code: MEIR11 No. of Credits: 02
Course Name: Basic Mechanical Engineering Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES
1. To introduce and define the basics concept of mechanical engineering.
2. To familiarize the working principles of IC engines and automobile systems.
3. To enable the students to understand the details about the energy systems and its components.
4. To demonstrate the various machine elements, materials and its function.
5. To help the students acquire knowledge about the various manufacturing process. 
COURSE CONTENT
Introduction to Mechanical Engineering, Thermal Engineering, Design, manufacturing 
Engineering.
IC Engines e 2 Stroke and 4 stroke systems in IC Engines. Automobiles - Transmission systems, 
Suspension system, E-Vehicles.
Energy Systems - Power plants, Types, Gas Turbines, Steam Turbines, Utility boilers, R & A/C 
system- Green Energy production and Devices.
Engineering materials, Machine elements, Transmission, Fasteners, Support systems.
Manufacturing, Classification, Metal forming, Casting, Lathe, Drilling machines, Milling 
machines, Metal joining.
COURSE OUTCOME
At the end of the course, students will be able
1. To identify the basic concept and fundamentals of mechanical engineering.
2. To understand the working principle of IC engines and Energy systems.
3. To appreciate the process and materials involved in the manufacture of various machine 
element components.
References
1. Basant Agarwal and C.M. Agarwal, Basic Mechanical Engineering, Wiley India Pvt. Ltd., 
2008. 
2. Sadhu Singh, Basic Mechanical Engineering, S. Chand & Company Limited, 2009. 
3. P.K. Nag, Karthikeya Tripathi, C.S. Pawar, Basic Mechanical Engineering, Tata McGraw 
Hill Publishing Company, 2009. 
4. Lecture notes prepared by Department of Mechanical Engineering, NITT, 2018. 
Page 20 of 23
MEIR12 ENGINEERING GRAPHICS
Course Code: MEIR12 No. of Credits: 03
Course Name: Engineering Graphics Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES
1. Irrespective of engineering discipline, it has become mandatory to know the basics of 
Engineering Graphics. The student is expected to possess the efficient drafting skill 
depending on the operational function in order to perform day to day activity.
2. Provide neat structure of industrial drawing.
3. Enables the knowledge about position of the component and its forms Interpretation of 
technical graphics assemblies.
4. Preparation of machine components and related parts.
COURSE CONTENT
Fundamentals Drawing standard - BIS, dimensioning, lettering, type of lines, scalingconventions.
Orthographic projection Introduction to orthographic projection, drawing orthographic views of
objects from their isometric views - Orthographic projections of points lying in four quadrants. 
Orthographic projection of lines parallel and inclined to one or both planes Orthographic 
projection of planes inclined to one or both planes. Projections of simple solids - axis 
perpendicular to HP, axis perpendicular to VP and axis inclined to one and both planes.
Sectioning of solids Section planes perpendicular to one plane and parallel or inclined to other
plane.
Intersection of surfaces Intersection of cylinder & cylinder, intersection of cylinder & cone, and
intersection of prisms.
Development of surfaces Development of prisms, pyramids and cylindrical & conical surfaces.
Isometric and perspective projection Isometric projection and isometric views of different planes 
and simple solids, introduction to perspective projection.
COURSE OUTCOME
At the end of the course student will be able to visualize the engineering components. A number 
of chosen problems will be solved to illustrate the concepts clearly.
References
1. Bhatt, N. D. and Panchal, V.M, Engineering Drawing, Charotar Publishing House, 2010.
2. Ken Morling, Geometric and Engineering Drawing, 3rd Edition, Elsevier, 2010
3. Jolhe, D. A., Engineering drawing, Tata McGraw Hill, 2008
4. Shah, M. B. and Rana, B. C., Engineering Drawing, Pearson Education, 2009
5. K.V. Natarajan, A text book of Engineering Graphics, Dhanalakshmi Publishers, 
Chennai, 2006.
Page 21 of 23
CEIR11 BASIC CIVIL ENGINEERING
(All Branches except CE)
Course Code: CEIR11 No. of Credits: 02
Course Name: Basic Civil Engineering Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES 
 To give an overview of the fundamentals of the Civil Engineering fields to the students
of all branches of Engineering.
 To realize the importance of the Civil Engineering Profession in fulfilling societal 
needs.
COURSE CONTENT 
Properties and uses of construction materials - stones, bricks, cement, concrete and steel. 
Site selection for buildings - Component of building - Foundation- Shallow and deep foundations 
- Brick and stone masonry - Plastering - Lintels, beams and columns - Roofs. 
Roads-Classification of Rural and urban Roads- Pavement Materials-Traffic signs and road 
Marking-Traffic Signals. 
Surveying - Classification-Chain Survey-Ranging-Compass Survey-exhibition of different 
survey equipment. 
Sources of Water - Dams- Water Supply-Quality of Water-Wastewater Treatment e e Sea Water 
Intrusion e Recharge of Ground Water. 
COURSE OUTCOME 
1. The students will gain knowledge on site selection, construction materials, components 
of buildings, roads and water resources 
2. A basic appreciation of multidisciplinary approach when involved in Civil Related 
Projects. 
References
1. Punmia, B.C, Ashok Kumar Jain, Arun Kumar Jain, Basic Civil Engineering, Lakshmi 
Publishers, 2012. 
2. Satheesh Gopi, Basic Civil Engineering, Pearson Publishers, 2009. 
3. Rangwala, S.C, Building materials, Charotar Publishing House, Pvt. Limited, Edition 27, 
2009.
4. Palanichamy,M.S, Basic Civil Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill, 2000. 
5. Lecture notes prepared by Department of Civil Engineering, NITT. 
Page 22 of 23
EEIR11 BASICS OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING
(For CL, CE, ME, MME, PR)
Course Code: EEIR11 No. of Credits: 02
Course Name: Basic Electrical and Electronics Engineering Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES 
 This course aims to equip the students with a basic understanding of Electrical circuits 
and machines for specific types of applications. 
 The course gives a comprehensive exposure to house wiring. 
 This course also equips students with an ability to understand basics of analog and digital 
electronics. 
COURSE CONTENT 
DC & AC Circuits: Current, voltage, power, Kirchhoffiais Laws - circuit elements R, L and C, 
phasor diagram, impedance, real and reactive power in single phase circuits. 
DC & AC Machines: DC Motor, Induction motor, Synchronous motor, Synchronous generator 
and Transformers- construction, principle of operation, types and applications. 
House wiring & safety: Single phase and three phase system e phase, neutral and earth, basic 
house wring - tools and components, different types of wiring e e staircase, florescent lamp and 
ceiling fan, basic safety measures at home and industry.
Analog Electronics: semiconductor devices e p-n junction diode, Zener diode, BJT, operational 
amplifier e principle of operation and applications e e Introduction to UPS. 
Digital Electronics: Introduction to numbers systems, basic Boolean laws, reduction of Boolean 
expressions and implementation with logic gates. 
COURSE OUTCOME 
The students shall develop an intuitive understanding of the circuit analysis, basic concepts of 
electrical machines, house wiring and basics of electronics and be able to apply them in practical 
situation. 
References
1. Hughes revised by Mckenzie Smith with John Hilcy and Keith Brown, Electrical and 
Electronics Technology, 8th Edition, Pearson, 2012. 
2. R.J. Smith, R.C. Dorf, Circuits Devices and Systems, 5th Edition, John Wiley and sons, 
2001.
3. P. S. Dhogal, Basic Electrical Engineering e Vol. I & II, 42nd Reprint, McGraw Hill, 
2012.
4. Malvino, A. P., Leach D. P. and Gowtham Sha, Digital Principles and Applications, 6th
Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2007. 
5. Vincent Del Toro, Electrical Engineering Fundamental, Prentice Hall India, 2002. 
Page 23 of 23
PRIR11 ENGINEERING PRACTICE
Course Code: PRIR11 No. of Credits: 02
Course Name: Engineering Practice Prerequisite: Nil
OBJECTIVES
 To use hand tools and machinery in Carpentry, welding shop, Foundry, Fitting shop and 
Sheet Metal work.
 To manufacture engineering products or prototypes.
COURSE CONTENT
Foundry: Mould preparation for Flange and Hand Wheel, Plastic moulding / Wax moulding.
Welding: Fabrication of Butt Joint and Fabrication of Lap Joint.
Carpentry: Wood sizing exercise in planning, marking, sawing, chiseling and grooving to 
make; Tee Through Halving Joint and Dovetail Scarf Joint.
Fitting: Preparation of joints, markings, cutting and filling for making; Semi-circle part with 
the given work piece, Dovetail part with the given work piece. 
Sheet metal: Fabrication of Dust Pan and Fabrication of Corner Tray.
COURSE OUTCOME
1. Know to utilize hand tools and machineries in Carpentry, Welding shop, Foundry, Fitting 
shop and Sheet Metal work.
2. Produce simple engineering products or prototypes
References
1. R.K. Rajput, Workshop Practice, Laxmi Publications (P) Limited, 2009.
2. Shashi Kant Yadav, Workshop Practice, Discovery Publishing House, New Delhi, 
2006.